---
layout: post
title:  "Smart Syncing via FTP(S)"
date:   2015-07-13
categories: devops
permalink: /lftp
---
{% include stupid.html %}

More often than not all you really need to get the job done is a static website. Yes, I mean it. Even if the client wants to be able to make simple edits, tools such as <a href="http://www.cushycms.com" target="_blank">CushyCMS</a> can be used.

For a very low budget one can get hosting for $2 - $4 a month, often with unlimited disk space, traffic and databases. I have always found it a painful process to push updates to those shared hosting accounts. I used FileZILLA to drag and drop my files over via FTP(S).

Fortunately, I recently discovered a nifty command line application called lftp. lftp is a great file transfer application that even recognizes file changes, so there is no need to always transfer an entire directory.

Here is a quick example of how I use lftp to connect to a shared hosting account.

    lftp ftp.example.com

    lftp ftp.example.com: ~> user username password

    lftp ftp.example.com: ~> mirror -R --exclude .git/ --exclude .gitignore

That's it. Pretty simple, quick and it works great. By the way, the -R flag transfers local files to the remote account. Without that flag, lftp mirrors the remote content to your local folder.

Please note that FTP is by no means a secure way to transfer data. If you need to transfer confidential information make sure to use FTPS (FTP over SSL), or even better SFTP(SSH File Transfer Protocol).

Let me know how it goes for you.

{% include disqus.html %}
